

===== PAGE 1 =====
npj | drug discovery Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44386-026-00047-4
MAMMAL - Molecular Aligned Multi-Modal
Architecture and Language for biomedical
discovery
Check for updates
Yoel Shoshan1,4 , Moshiko Raboh1,4, Michal Ozery-Flato1,4, Vadim Ratner1, Alex Golts1, Jeffrey K. Weber2,
Ella Barkan1, Simona Rabinovici-Cohen1, Sagi Polaczek1, Ido Amos1, Ben Shapira1, Liam Hazan1,
Matan Ninio1, Sivan Ravid1, Michael M. Danziger1, Yosi Shamay3, Sharon Kurant3, Joseph A. Morrone2,
Parthasarathy Suryanarayanan2, Michal Rosen-Zvi1,4 & Efrat Hexter1,4
Modern AI (Artificial Intelligence) methods offer new opportunities in pharmacology by enabling
improved modeling of disease mechanisms and drug action learned from large and heterogeneous
biological datasets. A central challenge is developing models that can jointly integrate disparate
biomedical modalities. We introduce MAMMAL (Molecular Aligned Multi Modal Architecture and
Language), a foundation model for cross-modal learning, designed to address the challenges
associated with drug discovery tasks. MAMMAL was pre-trained on 2 billion samples across protein
and antibody sequences, small molecules, and gene expression profiles, and supports classification,
regression, and generative tasks on cross-modal inputs. Across eleven benchmarks covering multiple
stages of the drug discovery pipeline, MAMMAL achieves state-of-the-art performance on nine tasks
and competitive results on two. In an antibody-antigen binding benchmark, fine-tuned MAMMAL
prediction scores significantly outperform AlphaFold3 confidence scores, used here as a reference
proxy for binding likelihood, in five of seven antigen targets. The MAMMAL framework and pretrained
models are publicly available to support open and collaborative research.
Despite major advances in understanding health and disease, many com- Accelerating drug discovery and improving the predictive accuracy of
plex biological processes remain poorly understood. Recent progress in its steps have become a central focus in biomedical research, with the goal of
artificial intelligence has raised the prospect that longstanding health chal- streamlining target identification, drug design, and testing8–10. Analyzing
lenges may prove treatable with AI-based methods1 and that the high failure gene expression profiles, particularly from single-cell RNA sequencing
rate of drugs in clinical trials, where approximately 90% of drug candidates (scRNA-seq), has emerged as a key approach for distinguishing disease-
fail to achieve regulatory approval2, can be improved. Over the past century, associated cell populations and characterizing drug-induced cellular
the translation of biological discoveries into effective therapies has matured. responses11–14. These analyses support target identification, mechanistic
The drug discovery journey follows a multi-step pipeline that begins with understanding, and assessment of drug effects across diverse cellular
identifying disease-associated proteins, progresses to finding compounds contexts15,16. In parallel, generative models have been increasingly applied to
that can effectively target these proteins, and culminates in optimizing drug drug design, enabling the synthesis of novel candidate molecules for further
candidates to meet stringent standards for efficacy and safety. This process is evaluation17–19. As high-throughput screening assays for measuring drug
both costly and labor-intensive, requiring extensive laboratory assays that binding affinity are costly and challenging to scale, accurate prediction of
measure drug-target interactions, characterize cellular responses, and vali- drug-target interactions can significantly enhance drug design, improving
date therapeutic safety and efficacy3–5. Therapeutic modalities range from both efficacy and precision. Overall, predictive modeling of binding affinity,
small molecules, which are stable, easy to manufacture, and suitable for oral toxicity, and efficacy in the early stages of the pipeline can reduce reliance on
delivery6, to biologic therapeutics, such as engineered antibodies, which offer expensive late-stage testing, ultimately saving time and resources in drug
high specificity but require more complex manufacturing and delivery7. development.
1IBM Research-Israel, IBM Research, Haifa, Israel. 2IBM TJ Watson Research Center, IBM Research, New York, NY, USA. 3Faculty of Biomedical Engineering,
Technion - IIT, Haifa, Israel. 4These authors contributed equally: Yoel Shoshan, Moshiko Raboh, Michal Ozery-Flato, Michal Rosen-Zvi, Efrat Hexter.
e-mail: yoels@il.ibm.com
npj Drug Discovery | ( 2026) 3:14 1
;,:)(0987654321 ;,:)(0987654321

===== PAGE 2 =====
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44386-026-00047-4 Article
A central challenge in developing predictive and generative AI models representative encoder-decoder examples are provided in the Supple-
for drug discovery is determining how the different biomedical modalities mentary Table S1.
and entities should be represented and combined as model inputs and AlphaFold22, whose development contributed to the 2024 Nobel
outputs20. This challenge is particularly acute for interaction-centric tasks, Prize in Chemistry, revolutionized protein structure prediction. Its
such as predicting whether a small-molecule drug will bind a specific protein extension AlphaFold-Multimer23 enabled modeling of antibody-antigen
target. While sequence-based representations of molecules (e.g., SMILES) complexes, while AlphaFold 3 (AF3)24 further improved accuracy and
and proteins have demonstrated considerable success, the representation of added nucleic acid/small molecule support. Motivated by AF3’s reported
transcriptomic data as sequences has only recently been explored, leading to advances, we evaluated its performance on therapeutic Antibody and
a range of emerging approaches21. Nanobody complexes (Subsection 2.10). Comparative analysis reveals
In this work, we introduce a cross-domain foundation model that that MAMMAL achieves better classification performance than AF3 in
represents small molecules, proteins, and transcriptomic data within a five of seven targets (Table 2).
unified sequence framework. We present MAMMAL (Molecular
Aligned Multi-Modal Architecture and Language), designed to address Evaluation
core challenges in AI-driven drug discovery. Our key contributions are: We compiled a comprehensive set of 11 benchmarks covering multiple data
(1) a novel multi-alignment framework that integrates molecular, pro- domains and task types, including classification, regression and generation,
tein, and gene-expression inputs using a flexible, structured prompt as well as single-entity, multi-entity, and multi-domain tasks. These
syntax, enabling modeling of complex multi-entity interactions such as benchmarks address key stages of the drug discovery process: Identifying
drug-target binding; (2) an architecture tailored to drug discovery that target cell types (Cell Type) and advancing precision medicine (Cancer-
natively incorporates numerical values into its embedding space via Drug Response 1-3); predicting drug efficacy (BBBP) and safety (ClinTox);
continuous projections. This improves precision for tasks such as affinity predicting the binding affinity of small-molecule drugs to target proteins
prediction and structural integration, while supporting both predictive (DTI); predicting interactions of biological drugs (PPI); and designing new
and generative objectives; and (3) a large-scale pre-trained model trained drugs, such as antibodies, to target specific proteins (Ab Infilling).
on over 2 billion samples across denoising, infilling, and binding-related To enable fair and direct comparison to prior work, benchmark
tasks. Across 11 benchmarks spanning multiple stages of the drug dis- selection prioritized datasets with predefined train, validation, and test splits
covery pipeline, fine-tuned MAMMAL achieves state-of-the-art per- or with established splitting strategies reported in the corresponding state of
formance on nine tasks. The model and pre-trained weights are publicly the art studies. For each benchmark, we followed the data splits and eva-
available on https://huggingface.co/ibm/biomed.omics.bl.sm.ma-ted- luation metrics used in the original benchmark or SOTA reference. When
458m under the name ibm/biomed.omics.bl.sm.ma-ted- explicit train—validation—test splits were available, ibm/biomed.o-
458m, providing a platform for advancing research in multimodal mics.bl.sm.ma-ted-458m was fine tuned on the training set, the best
biomedical modeling. checkpoint was selected using the validation set, and final performance was
reported on the test set. For benchmarks evaluated using cross validation, we
Results adopted the same protocol as the corresponding prior work. Unless
To evaluate the performance and generalization capabilities of ibm/ otherwise noted, standard errors were estimated by training the models with
biomed.omics.bl.sm.ma-ted-458m, we selected a diverse set of three different random seeds and calculating the standard deviation of their
existing benchmarks spanning multiple task types and stages of the drug performance on the held out test set. Detailed descriptions of each bench-
discovery pipeline, prioritizing benchmarks with clearly defined splits mark, the fine tuning procedures, and the evaluation protocols are provided
when those were available. We assessed model quality through a fine- alongside the corresponding results. For the DTI benchmark, performance
tuning-based evaluation strategy, where the pretrained model is adapted is reported using normalized root mean square error (NRMSE), defined as
to each benchmark and compared against specialized state-of-the-art the root mean square error divided by the standard deviation of the test
(SOTA) models. The evaluation methodology and fine-tuning protocol labels. The same normalization is applied to both MAMMAL and reported
as well as detailed descriptions of each benchmark—including back- SOTA results, yielding values below 1 and enabling joint visualization
ground, significance for drug discovery, prior models, and data statistics alongside other performance metrics in Fig. 1(E). We consider MAMMAL
—are provided in the subsections below. A summary of performance to outperform existing state of the art when the relative improvement,
across tasks is presented in Table 1 and visualized in Fig. 1E, and computed as ∣SOTA − MAMMAL∣/SOTA, exceeds 1%.
Table 1 | Comparison of SOTA and MAMMAL Performance Across Benchmarks
Benchmark Domain Type Metric SOTA MAMMAL Imp.
Cell type GE cls ↑ F1 27 0.710 0.763 ± 0.012 7.5 %
BBBP SM cls ↑ AUROC 32 0.937 0.957 ± 0.006 2.2 %
ClinTox SM cls ↑ AUROC 32 0.948 0.986 ± 0.007 4.0 %
Cancer-Drug Response 1 GE+SM reg ↑ Pearson 92 0.887 0.917 ± 0.001 3.4 %
Cancer-Drug Response 2 GE+SM reg ↑ Pearson 92 0.900 0.931 ± 0.002 3.4 %
Cancer-Drug Response 3 GE+SM reg ↑ Pearson 36 0.923 [0.917–0.929] 0.928 ± 0.000 0.5 %
Ab Infilling Protein gen ↑ CDRH3-AAR 47 0.375 0.446 ± 0.002 19.0 %
AbAg Bind Protein cls ↑ AUROC 63 0.924 [0.923–0.925] 0.928 ± 0.002 0.4 %
TCR Bind Protein cls ↑ AUROC 54 0.862 [0.85–0.868] 0.879 ± 0.003 2.0 %
PPI ΔΔG Protein reg ↑ Pearson 104 0.663 0.852 ± 0.041 28.5 %
DTI Prot.+SM reg ↓ NRMSE 60 0.942 ± 0.028 0.906 ± 0.011 3.8%
For NRMSE, lower is better. For other metrics (AUROC, CDRH3-AAR, Pearson, Spearman, and F1), higher is better. Each row shows the results from a MAMMAL model fine-tuned from ibm/
biomed.omics.bl.sm.ma-ted-458m for the corresponding task. In the “Type” column: clsclassification, reg regression, gengeneration, Imp. improvement (percentage) of our model over SOTA. In the
“Domain” column: GE genes expression, SM small molecule, Prot. protein.
npj Drug Discovery | ( 2026) 3:14 2

===== PAGE 3 =====
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44386-026-00047-4 Article
Fig. 1 | Overview of MAMMAL pretraining data, model architecture, and prediction head for scalar outputs. In encoder-decoder mode, residual connections
downstream tasks. A We introduce a multi-align model pretrained on six datasets, inject features from the encoder’s final hidden layer into each decoder layer, and a
each containing tens to hundreds of millions of data points. These data points decoder-specific prediction head outputs the final logits. C Diverse downstream
include protein sequences, small molecules, and gene expression profiles, with a tasks performed by the multi-align model, mapped to their contributions within the
combined sample size of 2 billion. B The multi-align model combines flexible steps of a typical drug discovery pipeline. D Diverse downstream tasks performed by
encoder-only and encoder-decoder components. It takes sequences as input, which the multi-align model, categorized by data type used in the fine-tuning process.
may contain any combination of tokens and scalar elements, processed by an E Performance of the multi-align model across a diverse set of tasks compared to
encoder stack consisting of self-attention blocks. In encoder-only mode, a dedicated SOTA. Panel (E) was generated using Matplotlib. Panels (A–D) were created using
token prediction head outputs logits for token predictions, with an optional scalar Illustrator and PowerPoint.
Table 2 | Per-target AUROC comparison between MAMMAL and AF3 on held-out antibody/nanobody–antigen test subsets
Target length (AA) n pos MAMMAL AUROC AF3 AUROC ΔAUROC P-value
HER2 ECD 630 60 30 0.93 0.45 +0.42 1.5 × 10−6
Albumin 609 28 11 0.91 0.59 +0.32 7.4 × 10−3
CD206 1,456 37 14 1.00 0.59 +0.41 1.1 × 10−5
EGFR 1,210 28 11 0.94 0.49 +0.45 2.2 × 10−5
TBG 384 32 5 0.63 1.00 −0.37 1.0 × 10−4
TNFα 233 34 13 0.86 0.87 −0.01 NS
VWF 2,813 34 13 0.83 0.32 +0.51 3.9 × 10−6
P-values were computed using the DeLong test for correlated ROC curves. ΔAUROC denotes AUROCMAMMAL − AUROCAF3. NS indicates a non-significant difference (p > 0.1). ECD denotes the
extracellular domain. Bold in the AUROC column of a method (MAMMAL or AF3) indicates higher result for that method. Bold in the ΔAUROC column indicates rows where MAMMAL outperforms AF3.
Cell Type Annotation and annotation using classification25. Recent advances in transformer-based
Cell type prediction enables researchers to distinguish between different cell and large-scale foundation models26–28 have shown improved performance.
populations, such as those associated with various diseases11–14. It is also The input for this task is single-cell gene expression data. The
crucial for understanding how diseases or drugs affect different cell types. In benchmark we used was based on the Zheng68k dataset29, which is
recent years, a variety of methods have been developed for this task, composed of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells and is widely
including approaches based on marker genes, correlation-based techniques, used for evaluating cell-type annotation performance, due to the
npj Drug Discovery | ( 2026) 3:14 3

===== PAGE 4 =====
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44386-026-00047-4 Article
similarity of the cell types involved. The dataset contains 68,579 cells current SOTA models for Cancer-Drug Response 1 and 2 (Table 1),
across 11 cell types and originally included 32,738 genes, which after achieving a 3.4% increase in Pearson correlation values. Additionally, it
removing non-expressed genes leaves 20,387 genes in the benchmark. yields results comparable to the SOTA for the Cancer-Drug Response 3
Preprocessing involved normalization, log transformation of expression benchmark, with a slight improvement of 0.5%.
values, followed by binning. Similar to the approach in30, our model uses a To further evaluate MAMMAL’s predictive capability on novel
ranked list of expressed gene names, ordered by their expression levels, as compounds, we assessed drug response predictions for four drugs not
input. The label to predict is provided in the cell ontology format present in the GDSC training data: Carfilzomib, Nintedanib, Infigratinib,
“CL:NNNNNN” (see Supplementary Table S1). and Vemurafenib. Tanimoto similarity analysis confirmed that three of
Following prior work27, we adopted a 5-fold cross-validation strategy to these drugs (Carfilzomib, Nintedanib, and Infigratinib) have no struc-
fine-tune and evaluate ibm/biomed.omics.bl.sm.ma-ted-458m, turally similar compounds in the training set (Tanimoto coefficient <0.7),
ensuring similar proportions of cell types across folds, and assessed per- while Vemurafenib shares moderate similarity (0.82) with PLX-4720, a
formance using accuracy and macro F1 score. MAMMAL outperforms the BRAF inhibitor present in GDSC. We performed experimental validation
previous state-of-the-art performance in both accuracy and F1 (Table 1 and using the same assay protocol employed in GDSC: cell viability was
detailed results in Supplementary Table S2), achieving a 7.5% measured using CellTiter-Glo following 72-hour drug incubation, and
improvement in F1. IC50 values were determined with Prism (GraphPad). The experimental
measurements revealed a consistent potency ranking across all tested cell
BBBP and ClinTox lines: Carfilzomib (most potent), followed by Nintedanib, Infigratinib,
To ensure the development of safe and effective drugs, candidates must and Vemurafenib (least potent). MAMMAL predictions reproduced this
satisfy rigorous criteria related to both efficacy and safety. In this study, we exact ranking for the tested cell lines. When extended to all 805 cell lines
selected two relevant benchmarks from MoleculeNet31, a widely used suite of in GDSC, the model preserved this relative ordering in approximately
benchmarks for evaluating machine learning models on small-molecule 90–95% of cases, suggesting that the predicted potency differences are
drug properties: BBBP and ClinTox. The BBBP benchmark focuses on largely cell line–independent.
predicting the ability of drugs to penetrate the blood-brain barrier, a critical Notably, Carfilzomib is a proteasome inhibitor approved exclusively
consideration for drugs targeting the central nervous system. The ClinTox for hematological malignancies (multiple myeloma), with limited efficacy in
benchmark comprises two related tasks: (1) predicting failure in clinical cells of solid tumors40. The model’s prediction of Carfilzomib as the most
toxicity trials, and (2) predicting FDA approval status. The overall perfor- potent agent across diverse solid tumor cell lines aligns with our experi-
mance on ClinTox is reported as the average performance across these mental observations and suggests potential broader applicability that war-
two tasks. rants further investigation.
MoLFormer32, a well-established model for molecular embeddings
trained on 1.1 billion SMILES sequences, has achieved state-of-the-art Ab Infilling
performance on both the BBBP and ClinTox benchmarks. In our study, we Antibodies are a family of proteins produced by the immune system to
adopted the benchmarks from32, which provided predefined splits for neutralize foreign antigens and are of particular interest due to their high
training, validation, and testing. MAMMAL surpasses MoLFormer on both specificity and strong binding to target molecules41,42. These characteristics
benchmarks (Table 1), achieving an average area under the receiver oper- have made them a crucial class of therapeutics, driving significant research
ating characteristic curve (AUROC) score of 0.957 on BBBP and 0.986 on efforts into the design of new antibody-based drug candidates7,43–45.
ClinTox, representing improvements of 2.2% and 4%, respectively, over the Antigen-binding fragments (Fabs) are the antibody fragments that bind to
state of the art. antigens. It is composed of one constant domain and one variable domain of
each of the heavy and light chains. Each variable region is further divided
Cancer-Drug Response into four framework (FR) regions and three complementarity-determining
Identifying drug response at the cellular level is a critical step in the regions (CDRs). While FR regions are typically conserved, CDRs exhibit
development of new drugs. Two key public databases supporting this significant variation in their amino acid composition and are generally the
effort, particularly in cancer drug development, are the Cancer Cell Line primary determinants of binding affinity to the target antigen. When
Encyclopedia (CCLE)33 and the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer designing novel antibodies for a specific antigen, the typical approach is to
(GDSC)34. CCLE provides multi-omics profiles for around 1000 cancer explore alternative CDRs that could produce a new, functional antibody
cell lines, while GDSC offers data on the drug responses of these lines to with high binding affinity to the target41,42,46,47.
hundreds of drugs, commonly measured using the half-maximal inhi- Recently, several deep learning methods have been developed for
bitory concentration (IC ). Notable computational models addressed targeted antibody design, framing CDR prediction as an infilling task46–52.
50
this task35–37. These models predict missing CDR regions, represented by MASK
For our study, we used three subsets of the GDSC database: GDSC1 tokens, using the amino acid sequences of both the antigen and the
and GDSC2, available through the Therapeutics Data Commons (TDC)38, antibody’s FR regions. While prior approaches often relied on structural
and referred to in the paper as Cancer-Drug Response 1 and Cancer-Drug data, this information is scarce and challenging to obtain53. In contrast,
Response 2, respectively; and a subset published in36, referred to as Cancer- we fine-tune MAMMAL for the targeted antibody design task using only
Drug Response 3. A dataset statistics table summarizing the number of cell the sequence data of the antigen and the sequence of the antibody’s FR
lines, drugs, and cell–drug pairs is provided in Supplementary Table S3. We regions.
used the random splits provided by TDC for Cancer-Drug Response 1 and The targeted antibody design task benchmark is based on the SAbDab
2, while for Cancer-Drug Response 3, we followed the split methodology dataset53. Following the data processing outlined in47, we filtered out samples
outlined in36, reserving 5% of the data for the test set, stratified by TCGA39 with missing CDRs to enable direct comparison, even though MAMMAL
pathways associated with the cancer cell lines. supports samples that contain missing CDRs. Consistent with47, we ran-
During fine-tuning, we used only gene-expression profiles and domly partitioned the dataset into training, validation, and test folds while
SMILES representations of drugs, as shown in the example prompt in the ensuring that samples with similar heavy-chain third CDR (CDRH3) sub-
Supplementary Table S1. Similar to the input format for cell type annota- sequences remained in the same fold. MAMMAL demonstrates superior
tion, gene-expression profiles were provided as ranked lists of gene names amino acid recovery (AAR), defined as the fraction of correctly predicted
based on their expression levels. For predicting continuous IC values, residues, across all masked CDRs (Table 1; detailed results are provided in
50
MAMMAL was utilized in regression mode, taking advantage of its built-in Supplementary Table S4). Notably, in CDRH3, the most variable region, it
support for floating-point scalar predictions. Our model outperforms the exhibits a remarkable improvement of 19%.
npj Drug Discovery | ( 2026) 3:14 4

===== PAGE 5 =====
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44386-026-00047-4 Article
T-Cell Receptor-Epitope Binding mutant complexes, without structural information. Leveraging
T-cell receptor (TCR) binding to immunogenic peptides (epitopes) pre- MAMMAL–s support for continuous-valued outputs, we formulate ΔΔG
sented by major histocompatibility complex molecules is a critical prediction as a regression task. Performance results are reported in Table 1.
mechanism in the adaptive immune system, essential for antigen recogni- Our model achieves an average Pearson correlation of 0.852, substantially
tion and triggering immune responses. The TCR repertoire exhibits con- exceeding the previous sequence-only state of the art (0.663), and remains
siderable diversity, consisting of an α-chain and a β-chain that function competitive with structure-based methods, falling only 1.6% short of the
together to enable T cells to recognize a wide array of epitopes. The β-chain reported best performance of 0.86656.
is especially significant, as it is crucial for the early stages of T-cell devel-
opment and possesses greater variability, which enhances the TCR’s capa- Drug-Target Interaction
city to identify diverse pathogens effectively. However, understanding the Predicting drug-target binding affinity plays a crucial role in the early stages
specific interactions between TCRs and epitopes remains a significant of drug discovery. Traditionally, binding affinities are measured through
challenge due to the vast variability in TCR sequences. Accurate prediction high-throughput screening experiments, which, while accurate, are
of TCR-peptide binding from sequence data would advance immunology resource-intensive and limited in their scalability to evaluate large sets of
by offering deeper insights into a patient’s immune status and disease his- drug candidates. In this task, we focus on predicting binding affinities using
tory. This capability holds potential applications in personalized immu- pK , the negative logarithm of the dissociation constant, which reflects the
D
notherapy, early diagnosis, and the treatment of diseases such as cancer and strength of the interaction between a small molecule (drug) and a protein
autoimmune disorders. In silico tools designed to model TCR-peptide (target). We utilize the PEER (Protein sEquence undERstanding)
interactions could facilitate the study of therapeutic T-cell efficacy and assess benchmark60 for DTI prediction. This benchmark leverages data from the
cross-reactivity risks, presenting an opportunity for precision medicine. BindingDB dataset61, with a specific test split that holds out four protein
We evaluated the model on the task of predicting TCR-epitope binding classes - estrogen receptor, G-protein-coupled receptors, ion channels, and
from sequence data using the Weber benchmark (ref. 54, https:// receptor tyrosine kinases - for assessing generalization performance on
tdcommons.ai/multi_pred_tasks/tcrepitope), which consists of 47,182 unseen classes.
TCR β-chain epitope pairs. This dataset covers 192 distinct epitopes and For model fine-tuning, we conducted hyperparameter optimization,
includes 23,139 unique TCR β-chain sequences, with 50% of the pairs selecting an initial learning rate of 0.0004, with no dropout and no weight
serving as negative samples created by randomly pairing TCR sequences decay. We standardized the pK values based on the mean and standard
D
with epitopes they are not known to bind with. The dataset also includes the deviation of the training set. For evaluation, we transformed the predicted
CDR3 subsequence for each TCR β-chain, the most hypervariable region of values back to their original scale. Our model achieves an average NRMSE of
the chain. We used 10-fold cross-validation. The folds were pre-defined in 54. 0.906 (Table 1), demonstrating a solid improvement of 3.8% over the SOTA
Fine-tuning involved three concurrent tasks: TCR β-chain mask infilling reported by60.
and two classification tasks: (i) TCR β-chain epitope binding prediction and
(ii) TCR β-chain -CDR3 epitope binding prediction. Here, we report the Antibody-Antigen Binding Prediction
performance only for the TCR β-chain epitope binding prediction task. Our Accurate prediction of antigen-antibody binding can enhance the design
model achieves an average AUROC of 0.879 (Table 1), representing a sta- and optimization of therapeutic antibodies, leading to improved efficacy
tistically significant improvement of 2% over the SOTA, as our result falls and specificity. We employ the human epidermal growth factor receptor
outside the SOTA’s confidence interval. 2 (HER2) dataset62 as a benchmark for predicting antibody-antigen
binding. HER2 is a key target for certain types of breast and stomach
Protein-Protein Interaction - ΔΔG Prediction cancers. The dataset includes variations of the clinically approved ther-
An important factor in drug design is binding affinity, commonly measured apeutic antibody trastuzumab and their corresponding affinities for the
by the equilibrium dissociation constant, K , which is related to the Gibbs HER2 antigen. The dataset comprises 8,935 binding and 25,114 non-
D
free energy ΔG through the equation binding trastuzumab CDR H3 mutants, each with up to 10 mutations,
following de-duplication and the removal of samples labeled as both
ΔG ¼ kT lnðK Þ; ð1Þ binding and non-binding.
D
For the most accurate comparison with the SOTA (refs. 62,63), the
where k is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature55. HER2 dataset was divided into train (70%), validation (15%) and test (15%)
The effect of introducing mutations into a protein–protein complex is sets. For increased robustness, the train set was further divided into 5 folds.
commonly quantified by the change in binding free energy relative to the The reported results are from the 5 models trained on different train folds,
reference (wild-type) complex. This mutation-induced effect is captured by and evaluated on the test set.
the difference in Gibbs free energy, defined as Finetuning involved feeding the target antigen sequence as well as the
entire heavy-chain variable region as input and predicting binding to the
ΔΔG ¼ ΔG
mutant
(cid:2) ΔG
wild(cid:2)type
: target sequence. Our model achieves an average AUROC of 0.928 (Table 1),
slightly surpassing the SOTA, which incorporated structural data, unlike
By subtracting the wild-type free energy, ΔΔG isolates the energetic our model.
contribution of the mutation itself. As a result, ΔΔG provides a direct
measure of whether a mutation stabilizes or destabilizes binding and is a Comparison of AlphaFold 3 and MAMMAL in Predicting
standard target in studies of mutational effects on protein–protein Antibody-Antigen and Nanobody-Antigen Binding
interactions56–58. Accurate prediction of antibody-antigen and nanobody-antigen interac-
The SKEMPI dataset55 provides experimentally measured changes in tions is essential for evaluating therapeutic efficacy and guiding protein
thermodynamic parameters, including ΔG and kinetic rate constants, for engineering. Although AlphaFold 3 (AF3) is not explicitly designed as a
mutations in protein–protein complexes with known structures in the binary protein-protein interaction (PPI) classifier, binding likelihood can be
Protein Data Bank59. This dataset is widely used to benchmark methods for inferred from structure-derived confidence scores, such as predicted tem-
predicting mutation-induced changes in binding affinity, particularly ΔΔG. plate modeling (pTM) and interface predicted template modeling (ipTM),
A commonly used subset of SKEMPI comprising 1131 single-point muta- computed from predicted protein-protein complexes. These confidence
tions (S1131) is adopted as our benchmark. Following standard practice, we scores are derived from structural predictions rather than classification
report 10-fold cross-validation performance on this subset. The input for objectives. Recent studies suggest that these scores correlate with true
our model consists solely of amino acid sequences for the wild-type and binding events64,65.
npj Drug Discovery | ( 2026) 3:14 5

===== PAGE 6 =====
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44386-026-00047-4 Article
Fig. 2 | AF3-predicted nanobody binding poses on HER2 and TBG. a HER2 performance on this target (AUROC = 0.45). b Thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG)
extracellular domain (ECD) structure with representative AF3-predicted complexes structure with AF3-predicted complexes for binding and non-binding VHHs. In
for a binder and a non-binder. The FDA-approved therapeutic antibodies trastu- contrast to HER2, AF3 predicts distinct binding poses for binders versus non-
zumab (blue) and pertuzumab (purple) are shown for reference. AF3 predicts both binders on TBG, consistent with its strong discriminative performance on this target.
binders and non-binders engaging the same region of the HER2 ECD, which is Visualizations were generated using PyMOL.
distinct from the known therapeutic epitopes, consistent with its poor discriminative
Accordingly, we conduct an exploratory comparison between AF3- Discussion
derived confidence scores and a fine-tuned MAMMAL model for distin- Recent progress in biomedical foundation models has enabled substantial
guishing binders from non-binders. We emphasize that AF3 provides yet largely domain-specific advances across cellular and molecular biology.
detailed 3D structural hypotheses, whereas MAMMAL is a sequence-only Specialized model classes-including RNA expression-based models26,28,30,
model that produces probabilistic binding predictions; the comparison is protein language models67,68, and frameworks for small-molecule-protein
intended to assess relative discriminative power for binding prediction interaction modeling32-provide increasingly detailed representations of
rather than to equate the underlying modeling approaches. biological systems. Together, these efforts suggest the feasibility of inte-
We first evaluated the extracellular domain (ECD) of HER2, a well- grative frameworks such as the proposed AI-enabled “virtual cell”69,70.
characterized therapeutic antigen with experimentally validated binding Realizing this vision, however, requires approaches that can coherently align
epitopes. We used the HER2-specific MAMMAL model described in heterogeneous biological modalities within a scalable and unified
Subsection 2.9. Due to the computational demands and limited availability representation.
of AF3, the HER2 benchmark test set was downsampled to 60 examples, MAMMAL advances this goal by reframing diverse biological tasks as
comprising 30 binders and 30 non-binders. The HER2-specific MAMMAL sequence-to-sequence problems and introducing design choices tailored to
model demonstrates strong discriminative performance, achieving an drug discovery applications. Its multi-domain syntax and extensible toke-
AUROC of 0.88. In contrast, AF3 exhibits no meaningful separation nizer allow heterogeneous biological inputs and outputs to be expressed
between binders and non-binders (AUROC = 0.45), and the difference in within a shared sequence representation. The implementation of con-
performance between the two models is highly significant (DeLong test, P = tinuous embeddings for numerical variables preserves quantitative preci-
1.5 × 10−6). Structural analysis further reveals that AF3-predicted binding sion without the information loss typical of discretization, facilitating
sites are indistinguishable between binders and non-binders and deviate integration of biochemical and pharmacological measurements. MAM-
from the known epitopes of the FDA-approved antibodies trastuzumab and MAL further supports both encoder-only and encoder-decoder config-
pertuzumab (Fig. 2a). An extended comparative analysis of MAMMAL urations, offering the architectural flexibility required to address the broad
(pre-trained and fine-tuned) and AF3 is provided in Supplementary Table spectrum of predictive and generative tasks encountered throughout the
S5. This includes several AF3 confidence-score variants, using ipTM - and drug discovery pipeline. The strong performance of fine-tuned models
pTM-based scoring, and heavy-chain-only and heavy+light-chain input across multiple domains and stages highlights the practical utility of this
configurations. unified framework in established in silico benchmarks.
Next, we evaluated nanobody binding across six structurally diverse In addition to benchmark evaluations, MAMMAL was assessed in real-
antigen targets: albumin, mannose receptor (CD206), epidermal growth world settings, where it accurately predicted the relative potency ranking of
factor receptor (EGFR), thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG), tumor necrosis four drugs, including Carfilzomib40, a proteasome inhibitor approved only
factor alpha (TNFα), and von Willebrand factor (VWF). Binding nano- for hematological malignancies, across solid tumor cell lines. Wet-lab
bodies were collected from SAbDab-nano66, patents, and proprietary validation using the same CellTiter-Glo assay protocol as GDSC confirmed
datasets. Non-binders consisted of nanobodies experimentally confirmed as the predicted ordering. This result demonstrates the model’s capacity to
non-binding in phage-display library screenings, as well as nanobodies generalize to novel compounds and identify potentially repurposable agents
targeting unrelated antigens. From a total of 668 nanobody–antigen pairs for indications beyond their current approval. In parallel, MAMMAL has
(131 binders and 537 non-binders), we selected 475 sequences (64 binders been employed in joint studies with academic and industry collaborators,
and 411 non-binders) for MAMMAL fine-tuning and reserved including a published investigation supporting its ability to predict antibody
193 sequences (67 binders and 126 non-binders) for held-out evaluation. A activity against influenza hemagglutinin proteins71. Additional collaborative
single MAMMAL model was fine-tuned on training data comprising bin- studies involving prospective wet-lab validation of MAMMAL-guided
ders and non-binders across all targets, and subsequently evaluated sepa- predictions are currently in progress, further evaluating the framework
rately on the test subset corresponding to each target, with performance across diverse biological and therapeutic contexts.
compared against AF3 confidence scores computed on the same samples. We further evaluated MAMMAL for antibody binder versus non-
Test set statistics and per-target MAMMAL and AF3 performance are binder identification and compared it to AlphaFold 3 (AF3), which has
summarized in Table 2. Additional performance metrics for MAMMAL recently been explored as a proxy for estimating binding propensity via
and AF3 are presented in Supplementary Tables S6–S7. As shown, predicted interfaces64,65. Fine-tuned MAMMAL achieved robust dis-
MAMMAL significantly outperforms AF3 on the larger targets: albumin, criminative performance across six of seven antigens-including flexible,
CD206, EGFR, and VWF. In contrast, AF3 achieves superior performance glycosylated, and multi-domain targets such as CD206, EGFR, HER2,
on the smaller TBG target, and analysis of the predicted structures highlights albumin, and VWF-with AUROCs ranging from 0.83 to 1.00. In contrast,
distinct binding sites for binders versus non-binders (Fig. 2b and Supple- AF3, applied in a zero-shot setting, showed limited ability to separate bin-
mentary Figure S4). For the smallest protein, TNFα, the two models exhibit ders from non-binders for most targets (AUROC ≤ 0.59), performing well
comparable performance. only on the rigid globular antigen TBG and matching MAMMAL on TNFα.
npj Drug Discovery | ( 2026) 3:14 6

===== PAGE 7 =====
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44386-026-00047-4 Article
These limitations may reflect AF3’s bias toward true-positive PDB com- framework88 while introducing several key modifications on top of it. This
plexes, its lack of explicit negative supervision, and its reliance on a single design conceptualizes tasks as sequence-to-sequence problems within a
static conformation. As a result, AF3 struggles with proteins containing unified model, introducing three key features:
(cid:129)
heterogeneous or intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs), which comprise Optimized for Representation and Generation Tasks: Biomedical
30–40% of the human proteome and are known to challenge structure- models for drug discovery must perform diverse tasks, ranging from
based models72, including IDR-rich therapeutic targets such as EGFR73 and token-level or prompt-level representation to tasks requiring strong
HER274. In contrast, protein language models (PLMs) such as MAMMAL generative capabilities. For instance89, introduced a non-causal,
better capture the statistical properties of IDRs, consistent with observations decoder-only protein language model optimized for both under-
that pLM-based approaches perform well on IDR-related benchmarks75. standing and generating protein-related data, outperforming state-of-
These factors together likely contribute to MAMMAL’s improved robust- the-art baselines. MAMMAL is designed to jointly optimize for such
ness for binder identification across therapeutically relevant targets. diverse tasks, enabling the model to learn from multiple stages of the
Text-based large language models excel at understanding and rea- drug discovery pipeline. This collective learning is facilitated by a
soning over human language and have been adapted to the biomedical shared encoder, which bridges gaps between distinct AI applications in
domain through pretraining on PubMed abstracts and full-text articles. drug discovery. Specifically, MAMMAL supports both encoder-only
However, these models operate primarily on unstructured text and do not and encoder-decoder autoregressive modes. Encoder-only mode excels
explicitly represent structured biological modalities. In a comparison with in representation-heavy tasks, such as classification and regression,
BioMedLM76, reported in the Supplementary Information, MAMMAL while encoder-decoder mode is better suited for generative tasks. By
outperformed text-only models on tasks involving proteins and gene sharing encoder stack weights across these modes, MAMMAL
expression data, highlighting the limitations of language-only pretraining facilitates efficient multi-task training, with parameter updates
for biological data lying outside natural language, such as protein sequences conducted through gradient accumulation across all tasks.
(cid:129)
and gene expression measurements. Beyond text-based LLMs, prior work Flexible Multi-Domain Structured Prompts: Drug discovery tasks
includes graph neural networks, which encode molecular, protein, and often require prompts that describe molecular complexes composed of
biological-system topology and can directly represent knowledge graphs77. multiple entities. These prompts may also include attributes related to
While sequence-based representations can implicitly capture aspects of the entire complex or specific internal entities to improve prediction
three-dimensional structure78, explicitly modeling 3D information can accuracy. To address this, MAMMAL employs a modular tokenizer
further improve performance, motivating sequence models that input or that enables multi-domain structured prompts by assigning distinct
generate structural representations79–81. More recently, diffusion models sub-tokenizers to each entity type. Compared to free-text prompts,
have emerged as powerful methods for modeling molecules and proteins structured prompts provide a consistent and explicit representation of
directly in continuous atomic coordinate space24,82–84. In contrast to these input data, capturing relationships and attributes between entities, and
architecture- or modality-specific approaches, MAMMAL adopts a unify- facilitating the training. While MAMMAL primarily focuses on
ing sequence-to-sequence abstraction that decouples task definition from structured input, incorporating free text as an additional data source
architectural design. A key open challenge is how to combine this simplicity represents a natural extension. Recent advancements in biomedical
and flexibility with the expressive power of specialized models, particularly large language models90–92, demonstrate the potential of free-text
diffusion-based architectures that excel at high-fidelity structural prompts to enhance versatility and expand training datasets. Such
generation. integration could integrate free text directly, mix it with structured
The growing adoption of agentic workflows-leveraging LLMs and prompts, or leverage embeddings derived from extensively pre-trained
specialized agents to automate and accelerate discovery processes-marks a text models93, https://github.com/ibm-granite/granite-3.0-language-
broader shift in biomedical research practice85,86. Fine-tuned MAMMAL models/. These embeddings could harness the latent knowledge
models integrate naturally into this paradigm, providing modular, task- encoded within external models to enrich the system’s performance.
specific components that support scalable and efficient discovery workflows. (cid:129) Numerical Values Integration: A notable innovation of MAMMAL is
Fair and meaningful comparisons across biomedical models require its native support for numerical values (e.g., 2, 3.14, 10,000.1) as both
benchmarks with accessible datasets, reproducible data splits, and clear inputs and outputs. Numerical data is crucial for modeling drug dis-
evaluation protocols. Although the benchmarks used here satisfy these covery tasks and allows for direct representation of important attri-
criteria and span multiple stages of the drug discovery pipeline, our eva- butes. This capability expands the range of tasks MAMMAL can
luation is limited to models that publicly report results on these tasks, and handle, such as binding affinity prediction and protein folding. Many
claims of state-of-the-art performance should therefore be interpreted biomedical large language models either lack support for numerical
within this scope. Continued development of open benchmarks and models data90, employ limited solutions such as binning92, or rely on digit-
is essential for advancing robust and generalizable approaches for drug based representations91, which can inflate input length94, offer
discovery. We invite the community to evaluate their own models under this compelling digit-based approach of splitting the number into semantic
benchmark suite and to explore MAMMAL on new datasets and tasks. parts (mainly digits), supporting arbitrary scalar values while adding
only a limited number of tokens to the vocabulary. While this simplifies
Methods integration with standard language models, it inflates the number of
The MAMMAL method is built around three core components: The model input/output tokens significantly. This is especially evident in tasks like
architecture, the molecular prompt syntax, and extensive pretraining. In gene expression prediction which require supporting thousands of
Subsection 4.1, we detail the architecture and its enhancements to the scalars in a single prompt and expected model output95, suggests a new
standard transformer. loss term that considers numerical proximity, with the main advantage
Subsections 4.2 and 4.3 focus on the molecular representations and of not requiring any additional prediction head for scalars, allowing to
prompt syntax, key features that enable the support of a diverse range of introduce numerical values support within existing language model
pretraining and downstream tasks for drug discovery. Finally, Subsection architectures. However, it is currently limited to a fixed vocabulary, not
4.4 outlines the pretraining process, which facilitates leveraging large, cross- allowing support for arbitrary (possibly unseen in train time) scalar
domain datasets and handling multiple entities simultaneously. values. Other methods, such as discretization, demonstrated in81
through pre-trained VQ-VAE96 that encodes and decodes 3D spatial
MAMMAL Architecture positions, represent another approach limited to a specific use case.
The MAMMAL architecture builds upon the transformer architecture MAMMAL, however, integrates continuous numerical values directly
introduced by Vaswani et al.87 and draws inspiration from the T5 into its embedding space via a projection layer. The resulting
npj Drug Discovery | ( 2026) 3:14 7

===== PAGE 8 =====
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44386-026-00047-4 Article
Table 3 | Pretraining Tasks
Name Domain Entity Type Task Type Dataset Number of Samples
Protein LM Biologic General Protein Spans Masking LM Uniref9067 180M
Antibody LM Biologic Antibody Spans Masking LM OAS98 650M
Small Molecule LM Small Molecules Small Molecule Spans Masking LM ZINC100 + PubChem101 200M
Cell Genes LM Single Cell Transcript- omics Cell Genes Spans Masking LM CELLxGENE103 30M
Protein-Protein Interaction Biologic General Protein Classification STRING102 780M
Protein-Protein Biologic General protein Generation STRING102 390M
Interaction Gen.
Antibody Denoise Biologic Antibody Denoise Sequence OAS98 650M
Details on the pretraining tasks that were used while training ibm/biomed.omics.bl.sm.ma-ted-458m. “Number of Samples” lists the post-filtering number of samples actually used. A single model
was pretrained with all of the listed tasks, accumulating knowledge spanning multiple domains.
embeddings align with the input token embeddings, ensuring simple, Pretraining
efficient, and effective utilization of numerical data. MAMMAL is designed as a comprehensive foundation model, capable of
spanning multiple domains and accommodating a variety of entities. It is
Further details about the MAMMAL architecture can be found in intended to support diverse task types, ranging from representation-focused
Supplementary Figure S1. tasks to generation-oriented ones. To achieve this, MAMMAL is trained on
multiple tasks concurrently. Pretraining was conducted on two billion
Entity Representation samples sourced from six datasets, which are all publicly available, covering
Each entity domain supported by MAMMAL makes use of a representation three distinct domains across seven tasks. Table 3 summarizes these tasks,
approach that has been selected as follows: detailing the relevant domains, entity types, and specific datasets. Additional
(cid:129) Small Molecules. Represented using SMILES sequences (Simplified details about the pretraining are provided in the Supplementary
Molecular Input Line Entry System). For example, paracetamol is Information.
represented as CC(=O)NC1=CC=C(O)C=C1.
(cid:129) Gene Expression. Represented as an ordered list of gene names, sorted Data availability
in descending order based on log-normalized and binned expression All datasets used in this study are publicly available. Cell Type. The
values. In case of ties, genes are sorted alphabetically. This Zheng68k dataset was obtained from https://www.10xgenomics.com/
representation applies to both single-cell and bulk RNA datasets/fresh-68-k-pbm-cs-donor-a-1-standard-1-1-0(file: https://cf.
expression data. 10xgenomics.com/samples/cell-exp/1.1.0/fresh_68k_pbmc_donor_a/
(cid:129) Proteins. Represented as concatenated amino acid chains, preserving fresh_68k_pbmc_donor_a_filtered_gene_bc_matrices.tar.gz) BBBP and
original source-data order. This representation contains only sequence ClinTox benchmarks were obtained from https://github.com/IBM/
data, without structural information. molformer/tree/main/datathat points to https://ibm.ent.box.com/v/
(cid:129) Antibodies. Represented similarly to proteins, using concatenated MoLFormer-data(file: finetune_datasets.zip). Cancer-Drug
amino acid sequences. Each chain is prefixed with a token indicating its Response 1 and 2. The GDSC1 and GDSC2 benchmarks were acces-
type (heavy or light). sed with random splits from the TDC library (https://pypi.org/project/
PyTDC/). Cancer-Drug Response 3. The benchmark was obtained from
Prompt Syntax the DeepCDR36 git repository (https://github.com/kimmo1019/
The prompt syntax is built around a modular tokenizer architecture DeepCDR/tree/master/data). DTI. This benchmark was published by60
that governs how molecular data is interpreted and encoded. At its and is available in https://torchdrug.ai/docs/api/datasets.html#bindingdb
core, the tokenizer defines a common syntax using special tags that Ab Infilling. This data was taken from47, which provides a preprocessed
represent molecular entities, sequences, attributes, and interactions subset of the publicly available SAbDab database53. The preprocessing
across diverse molecular systems. It supports multi-domain inputs by pipeline includes a similarity-based clustering for the data splits and
delegating different segments of the input sequence to specialized sample-level filtering that excludes samples considered invalid in47. For
sub-tokenizers, each responsible for handling a specific data type or additional information, we refer to47 and the publicly available codebase:
modality. https://github.com/THUNLP-MT/dyMEAN. PPIΔΔG. The SKEMPI
All sub-tokenizers operate under the umbrella of the main tokenizer S1131 dataset of non-redundant single mutations was derived from
and share access to a unified set of special tokens, such as 〈EOS〉, ensuring SKEMPI55 in97 and can be downloaded from https://zhanggroup.org/
consistency across domains. Among these sub-tokenizers, a designated BindProfX/download/. TCR Bind The Weber TCR binding dataset was
numeric sub-tokenizer is used for handling continuous values. Instead of downloaded from https://tdcommons.ai/multi_pred_tasks/
tokenizing numeric values into discrete tokens, this sub-tokenizer projects tcrepitopeAntibody-Antigen Bind The HER2 antibody-antigen bind-
them directly into the model’s embedding space via a learned ing dataset was taken from the original paper62 github repository https://
projection layer. github.com/dahjan/DMS_opt. Pretraining. The ibm/biomed.o-
The prompt syntax applies uniformly to both inputs and outputs of the mics.bl.sm.ma-ted-458m was pre-trained over OAS98, UniProt99,
model. It is also designed to be extensible: New tags can be introduced into Zinc100, PubChem101, STRING102 and CELLxGENE103. Supplementary
individual sub-tokenizers or added to the shared token set without dis- Information describes the pre-processing steps applied.
rupting existing functionality. Thanks to this modular structure, updates to
domain-specific sub-tokenizers or the token vocabulary maintain backward Code availability
compatibility, enabling interoperability between newly trained and pre- The model architecture, fine-tuning framework, and end-to-end examples
viously deployed models. More detailed explanations and examples of the are publicly available at: https://github.com/BiomedSciAI/biomed-multi-
prompt syntax can be found in Supplementary Figures S2, S3 and Supple- alignment. This GitHub repository provides comprehensive resources for
mentary Table S1. working with the model, including setup instructions, fine-tuning
npj Drug Discovery | ( 2026) 3:14 8

===== PAGE 9 =====
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44386-026-00047-4 Article
guidelines, and inference workflows for multiple downstream tasks. Pre- 19. Swanson, K. et al. Generative ai for designing and validating easily
trained model weights and the associated tokenizer are hosted on the synthesizable and structurally novel antibiotics. Nat. Mach. Intell. 6,
Hugging Face Model Hub and can be accessed at: https://huggingface.co/ 338–353 (2024).
ibm/biomed.omics.bl.sm.ma-ted-458m. Additionally, selected fine-tuned 20. Athaya, T., Ripan, R. C., Li, X. & Hu, H. Multimodal deep learning
model checkpoints and tokenizers are available via: https://huggingface.co/ approaches for single-cell multi-omics data integration. Brief.
models?other=base_model:finetune:ibm-research/biomed.omics.bl.sm. Bioinforma. 24, bbad313 (2023).
ma-ted-458m, and can be explored interactively through the Hugging Face 21. Szałata, A. et al. Transformers in single-cell omics: a review and new
Space at: https://huggingface.co/spaces/ibm/biomed-multi-alignment. perspectives. Nat. methods 21, 1430–1443 (2024).
22. Jumper, J. et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with
Received: 2 September 2025; Accepted: 23 February 2026; AlphaFold. Nature 596, 583–589 (2021).
23. Evans, R. et al. Protein complex prediction with alphafold-multimer.
bioRxiv https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2022/03/10/2021.
References 10.04.463034 (2022).
1. Cheng, F. et al. Artificial intelligence and open science in discovery of 24. Abramson, J. et al. Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular
disease-modifying medicines for Alzheimer’s disease. Cell Rep. interactions with AlphaFold 3. Nature 630, 493–500 (2024).
Med. 5, 101379 (2024). 25. Qi, R., Ma, A., Ma, Q. & Zou, Q. Clustering and classification methods
2. Mullard, A. Parsing clinical success rates. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 15, for single-cell rna-sequencing data. Brief. Bioinforma. 21,
447–448 (2016). 1196–1208 (2020).
3. Paul, S. M. et al. How to improve r&d productivity: the 26. Cui, H. et al. scgpt: toward building a foundation model for single-cell
pharmaceutical industry’s grand challenge. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. multi-omics using generative AI. Nat. Methods 1–11 (2024).
9, 203–214 (2010). 27. Xu, J., Zhang, A., Liu, F., Chen, L. & Zhang, X. Ciform as a
4. DiMasi, J. A., Grabowski, H. G. & Hansen, R. W. Innovation in the transformer-based model for cell-type annotation of large-scale
pharmaceutical industry: new estimates of r&d costs. J. Health Econ. single-cell rna-seq data. Brief. Bioinforma. 24, bbad195 (2023).
47, 20–33 (2016). 28. Yang, F. et al. scbert as a large-scale pretrained deep language
5. Wouters, O. J., McKee, M. & Luyten, J. Estimated research and model for cell type annotation of single-cell rna-seq data. Nat. Mach.
development investment needed to bring a new medicine to market, Intell. 4, 852–866 (2022).
2009-2018. Jama 323, 844–853 (2020). 29. Zheng, G. X. et al. Massively parallel digital transcriptional profiling of
6. Southey, M. W. & Brunavs, M. Introduction to small molecule drug single cells. Nat. Commun. 8, 14049 (2017).
discovery and preclinical development. Front. Drug Discov. 3, 30. Theodoris, C. V. et al. Transfer learning enables predictions in
1314077 (2023). network biology. Nature 618, 616–624 (2023).
7. Lu, R.-M. et al. Development of therapeutic antibodies for the 31. Wu, Z. et al. Moleculenet: a benchmark for molecular machine
treatment of diseases. J. Biomed. Sci. 27, 1–30 (2020). learning. Chem. Sci. 9, 513–530 (2018).
8. Sadybekov, A. V. & Katritch, V. Computational approaches 32. Ross, J. et al. Large-scale chemical language representations
streamlining drug discovery. Nature 616, 673–685 (2023). capture molecular structure and properties. Nat. Mach. Intell. 4,
9. Huang, D., Yang, M., Wen, X., Xia, S. & Yuan, B. Ai-driven drug 1256–1264 (2022).
discovery: Accelerating the development of novel therapeutics in 33. Barretina, J. et al. The cancer cell line encyclopedia enables
biopharmaceuticals. J. Knowl. Learn. Sci. Technol. ISSN: 2959- predictive modelling of anticancer drug sensitivity. Nature 483,
6386 (online) 3, 206–224 (2024). 603–607 (2012).
10. Son, A. et al. Revolutionizing molecular design for innovative 34. Yang, W. et al. Genomics of drug sensitivity in cancer (gdsc): a
therapeutic applications through artificial intelligence. Molecules 29, resource for therapeutic biomarker discovery in cancer cells. Nucleic
4626 (2024). acids Res. 41, D955–D961 (2012).
11. Baslan, T. & Hicks, J. Unravelling biology and shifting paradigms in 35. Lind, A. P. & Anderson, P. C. Predicting drug activity against cancer
cancer with single-cell sequencing. Nat. Rev. Cancer 17, 557–569 cells by random forest models based on minimal genomic
(2017). information and chemical properties. PloS one 14, e0219774
12. Ofengeim, D., Giagtzoglou, N., Huh, D., Zou, C. & Yuan, J. Single-cell (2019).
rna sequencing: unraveling the brain one cell at a time. Trends Mol. 36. Liu, Q., Hu, Z., Jiang, R. & Zhou, M. Deepcdr: a hybrid graph
Med. 23, 563–576 (2017). convolutional network for predicting cancer drug response.
13. Rozenblatt-Rosen, O., Stubbington, M. J., Regev, A. & Teichmann, Bioinformatics 36, i911–i918 (2020).
S. A. The human cell atlas: from vision to reality. Nature 550, 451–453 37. Liu, X. et al. Graphcdr: a graph neural network method with
(2017). contrastive learning for cancer drug response prediction. Brief.
14. Potter, S. S. Single-cell rna sequencing for the study of Bioinforma. 23, bbab457 (2022).
development, physiology and disease. Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 14, 38. Huang, K. et al. Therapeutics Data Commons: Machine learning
479–492 (2018). datasets and tasks for drug discovery and development. Adv. Neural
15. Van de Sande, B. et al. Applications of single-cell rna sequencing in Inform. Processing Syst. (NeurIPS), Track on Datasets and
drug discovery and development. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 22, Benchmarks (2021).
496–520 (2023). 39. Weinstein, J. N. et al. The Cancer Genome Atlas Pan-Cancer
16. Dann, E. et al. Estimating the impact of single-cell rna sequencing of Analysis Project. Nat. Genet. 45, 1113–1120 (2013).
human tissues on drug target validation. medRxiv https://www. 40. Kortuem, K. M. & Stewart, A. K. Carfilzomib. Blood, J. Am. Soc.
medrxiv.org/content/early/2024/10/22/2024.04.04.24305313 Hematol. 121, 893–897 (2013).
(2024). 41. Hummer, A. M., Abanades, B. & Deane, C. M. Advances in
17. Tang, X. et al. A survey of generative ai for de novo drug design: new computational structure-based antibody design. Curr. Opin. Struct.
frontiers in molecule and protein generation. Brief. Bioinforma. 25, Biol. 74, 102379 (2022).
bbae338 (2024). 42. Chiu, M., Goulet, D., Teplyakov, A. & Gilliland, G. Antibody structure
18. Shanehsazzadeh, A. et al. Unlocking de novo antibody design with and function: the basis for engineering therapeutics. Antibodies
generative artificial intelligence. bioRxiv 2023–01 (2023). (Basel) 8 4), (2019).
npj Drug Discovery | ( 2026) 3:14 9

===== PAGE 10 =====
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44386-026-00047-4 Article
43. Basu, K., Green, E. M., Cheng, Y. & Craik, C. S. Why recombinant 65. Yin, R. & Pierce, B. G. Evaluation of alphafold antibody-antigen
antibodies - benefits and applications. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 60, modeling with implications for improving predictive accuracy.
153–158 (2019). Protein Sci. 33, e4865 (2024).
44. Carter, P. J. & Lazar, G. A. Next generation antibody drugs: pursuit 66. Schneider, C., Raybould, M. I. J. & Deane, C. M. Sabdab in the age of
of the’high-hanging fruit’. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 17, 197–223 biotherapeutics: updates including sabdab-nano, the nanobody
(2018). structure tracker. Nucleic Acids Res. 50, D1368–D1372 (2021).
45. Beck, A., Goetsch, L., Dumontet, C. & Corvaía, N. Strategies and 67. Consortium, T. U. UniProt: the Universal Protein Knowledgebase in
challenges for the next generation of antibody–drug conjugates. Nat. 2023. Nucleic Acids Res. 51, D523–D531 (2022).
Rev. Drug Discov. 16, 315–337 (2017). 68. Madani, A. et al. Progen: Language modeling for protein generation.
46. Saka, K. et al. Antibody design using lstm based deep generative arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.03497 (2020).
model from phage display library for affinity maturation. Sci. Rep. 11, 69. Bunne, C. et al. How to build the virtual cell with artificial intelligence:
5852 (2021). Priorities and opportunities. Cell 187, 7045–7063 (2024).
47. Kong, X., Huang, W. & Liu, Y. End-to-End Full-Atom Antibody 70. Song, L., Segal, E. & Xing, E. Toward ai-driven digital organism:
Design. Proc. Intl. Conf. on Mach. Learn. (ICML), 202, 17409–17429 Multiscale foundation models for predicting, simulating and
(2023). programming biology at all levels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.06993
48. Jin, W., Wohlwend, J., Barzilay, R. & Jaakkola, T. Iterative refinement (2024).
graph neural network for antibody sequence-structure co-design. 71. Barkan, E. et al. Leveraging large language models to predict
arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04624 (2021). antibody biological activity against influenza A hemagglutinin.
49. Jin, W., Barzilay, R. & Jaakkola, T. Antibody-Antigen Docking and Computational Struct. Biotechnol. J. 27, 1286–1295 (2025).
Design via Hierarchical Structure Refinement. Proc. 39th Intl. Conf. 72. Gopalan, S. & Narayanan, S. Hallucinations in alphafold3 for
on Mach. Learn. (ICML), 162, 10217–10227 (PMLR, 2022). intrinsically disordered proteins with disorder in biological process
50. Luo, S. et al. Antigen-specific antibody design and optimization with residues. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.15939 (2025).
diffusion-based generative models for protein structures. Adv. 73. Thomas, S. D. et al. Impact of intrinsically disordered regions and
Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 35, 9754–9767 (2022). functional disorder hotspots in the human kinome. Brief. Bioinforma.
51. Kong, X., Huang, W. & Liu, Y. Conditional antibody design as 3d 26, bbaf662 (2025).
equivariant graph translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.06073 74. Pinet, L. et al. Structural and dynamic characterization of the
(2022). c-terminal tail of ErbB2: Disordered but not random. Biophysical J.
52. Zhou, X. et al. Antigen-specific antibody design via direct energy- 120, 1869–1882 (2021).
based preference optimization. Adv. Neural Inform. Processing Syst. 75. Mehdiabadi, M. et al. Critical assessment of protein intrinsic disorder
(NeuRIPS), 37, 120861–120891 (2024). round 3-predicting disorder in the era of protein language models.
53. Dunbar, J. et al. Sabdab: the structural antibody database. Nucleic Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinforma. 94, 414–424 (2026).
acids Res. 42, D1140–D1146 (2014). 76. Bolton, E. et al. Biomedlm: A 2.7 b parameter language model trained
54. Weber, A., Born, J. & Rodriguez Martínez, M. Titan: T-cell receptor on biomedical text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.18421 (2024).
specificity prediction with bimodal attention networks. 77. Zhang, O. et al. Graph neural networks in modern ai-aided drug
Bioinformatics 37, i237–i244 (2021). discovery. Chem. Rev. 125, 10001–10103 (2025).
55. Jankauskaitė, J., Jiménez-García, B., Dapkūnas, J., Fernández- 78. Rives, A. et al. Biological structure and function emerge from scaling
Recio, J. & Moal, I. H. Skempi 2.0: an updated benchmark of changes unsupervised learning to 250 million protein sequences. Proc. Natl.
in protein–protein binding energy, kinetics and thermodynamics Acad. Sci. 118, e2016239118 (2021).
upon mutation. Bioinformatics 35, 462–469 (2019). 79. Zhou, G. et al. Uni-mol: A universal 3d molecular representation
56. Liu, X., Feng, H., Lü, Z. & Xia, K. Persistent tor-algebra for learning framework. In The eleventh international conference on
protein–protein interaction analysis. Brief. Bioinforma. 24, bbad046 learning representations (2023).
(2023). 80. Wang, J. et al. Token-mol 1.0: tokenized drug design with large
57. Wang, M., Cang, Z. & Wei, G.-W. A topology-based network tree for language models. Nat. Commun. 16, 4416 (2025).
the prediction of protein–protein binding affinity changes following 81. Hayes, T. et al. Simulating 500 million years of evolution with a
mutation. Nat. Mach. Intell. 2, 116–123 (2020). language model. bioRxiv https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/
58. Guo, Z. & Yamaguchi, R. Machine learning methods for protein- 2024/07/02/2024.07.01.600583.full.pdf (2024).
protein binding affinity prediction in protein design. Front. 82. Zhao, H. et al. Protein–peptide docking with a rational and accurate
Bioinforma. 2, 1065703 (2022). diffusion generative model. Nat. Mach. Intell. 7, 1308–1321 (2025).
59. Berman, H. M. et al. The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 83. Watson, J. L. et al. De novo design of protein structure and function
235–242 (2000). with rfdiffusion. Nature 620, 1089–1100 (2023).
60. Xu, M. et al. Peer: a comprehensive and multi-task benchmark for 84. Hoogeboom, E., Satorras, V. G., Vignac, C. & Welling, M. Equivariant
protein sequence understanding. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 35, diffusion for molecule generation in 3d (2022). arxiv: 2203.17003
35156–35173 (2022). 85. Gridach, M., Nanavati, J., Abidine, K. Z. E., Mendes, L. & Mack, C.
61. Gilson, M. K. et al. BindingDB in 2015: A public database for Agentic AI for scientific discovery: A survey of progress, challenges,
medicinal chemistry, computational chemistry and systems and future directions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.08979 (2025).
pharmacology. Nucleic Acids Res 44, D1045–53 (2015). 86. Ramos, M. C., Collison, C. J. & White, A. D. A review of large
62. Mason, D. M. et al. Optimization of therapeutic antibodies by language models and autonomous agents in chemistry. Chem. Sci.
predicting antigen specificity from antibody sequence via deep 16, 2514–2572 (2025).
learning. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 5, 600–612 (2021). 87. Vaswani, A. et al. Attention is all you need. Adv. Neural Inform.
63. Jing, H. et al. Accurate prediction of antibody function and structure Processing Syst. (NeurIPS), 30, 5998–6008 (2017).
using bio-inspired antibody language model. Brief. Bioinforma. 25, 88. Raffel, C. et al. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified
bbae245 (2024). text-to-text transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 21, 1–67 (2020).
64. Bennett, N. R. et al. Atomically accurate de novo design of 89. Chen, B. et al. xtrimopglm: Unified 100b-scale pre-trained
antibodies with rfdiffusion. bioRxiv https://www.biorxiv.org/content/ transformer for deciphering the language of protein (2024). arXiv:
early/2025/02/28/2024.03.14.585103.full.pdf (2025). 2401.06199
npj Drug Discovery | ( 2026) 3:14 10

===== PAGE 11 =====
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44386-026-00047-4 Article
90. Pei, Q. et al. Biot5: Enriching cross-modal integration in biology with Author contributions
chemical knowledge and natural language associations. In Proc. Study Design: Y. Shoshan, M.R., and M.O.F. contributed to the conception
2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language and design of the study. AI Development: Y.Shoshan, M.R., M.O.F., V.R.,
Processing (EMNLP), 1102–1123 (2023). A.G., E.B., S.R.C., S.P., I.A., B.S., L.H., M.N., S.R., and M.D. were involved in
91. Pei, Q. et al. Biot5+: Towards generalized biological understanding the development of the AI components usedin the study. Experiments: M.R.,
with iupac integration and multi-task tuning. Findings of ACL 2024, V.R., A.G., E.B., I.A., Y.Shamay, and S.K. conducted the experiments and
1216–1240 (2024). contributed to data acquisition and analysis. Manuscript Writing: Y.
92. Chaves, J. M. Z. et al. Tx-llm: A large language model for Shoshan., M.R., M.O.F., V.R., A.G., E.B., S.R.C., S.K, and Y.Shamay
therapeutics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06316 (2024). contributed to drafting and revising the manuscript. Critical Revisions: J.W.,
93. Touvron, H. et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language J.M., and P.S. provided substantial edits and critical feedback on the
models. arXiv: 2302.13971 (2023). manuscript.Supervision: E.H. and M.R.Z. supervised the overall project and
94. Born, J. & Manica, M. Regression transformer enables concurrent provided strategic guidance. All authors have read and approved the
sequence regression and generation for molecular language submitted version of the manuscript.
modelling. Nat. Mach. Intell. 5, 432–444 (2023).
95. Zausinger, J. et al. Regress, don’t guess – a regression-like loss on Competing interests
number tokens for language models (2024). arXiv: 2411.02083 The authors declare no competing interests.
96. van den Oord, A., Vinyals, O. & Kavukcuoglu, K. Neural discrete
representation learning (2018). arXiv: 1711.00937 Additional information
97. Xiong, P., Zhang, C., Zheng, W. & Zhang, Y. Bindprofx: assessing Supplementary information The online version contains
mutation-induced binding affinity change by protein interface supplementary material available at
profiles with pseudo-counts. J. Mol. Biol. 429, 426–434 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/s44386-026-00047-4.
98. Olsen, T. H., Boyles, F. & Deane, C. M. Observed antibody space: A
diverse database of cleaned, annotated, and translated unpaired Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
and paired antibody sequences. Protein Sci. 31, 141–146 (2022). Yoel Shoshan.
99. Suzek, B. E. et al. UniRef clusters: a comprehensive and scalable
alternative for improving sequence similarity searches. Reprints and permissions information is available at
Bioinformatics 31, 926–932 (2015). http://www.nature.com/reprints
100. Tingle, B. I. et al. Zinc-22-a free multi-billion-scale database of
tangible compounds for ligand discovery. J. Chem. Inf. Modeling 63, Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
1166–1176 (2023). jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
101. Kim, S. et al. PubChem 2023 update. Nucleic Acids Res. 51,
D1373–D1380 (2022). Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
102. Szklarczyk, D. et al. The STRING database in 2023: protein-protein Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
association networks and functional enrichment analyses for any adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
sequenced genome of interest. Nucleic Acids Res. 51, D638–D646 as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
(2022). provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
103. Biology, C. S.-C. et al. Cz cellxgene discover: A single-cell data were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
platform for scalable exploration, analysis and modeling of included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
aggregated data. BioRxiv 2023–10 https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/ otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
gkae1142 (2023). article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
104. Jin, R. et al. Attabseq: an attention-based deep learning prediction by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
method for antigen–antibody binding affinity changes based on obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
protein sequences. Brief. Bioinforma. 25, bbae304 (2024). licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Acknowledgements © The Author(s) 2026
Partially Supported by IBM-Technion Research Collaboration.
npj Drug Discovery | ( 2026) 3:14 11